THIS PAGE IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION. SCROLL TO SEE THREE AMCHART5 VISUALIZATIONS REGARDING NATIONAL EMERGENCIES. 

On the morning of November 6th, 2024, I took the M7 deep into Harlem. I didn't need to go as far as I did, but I had fallen into conversation about The Thing That Happened Last Night with somebody's grandmother. It was unusually hot for a New York November, and my Bus Grandma was dabbing beads of sweat off her perfectly made-up face. She spat lightly as she talked and patted my leg with her hand. As she sadly made peace with her future death preceding the presidency of a Black woman, her eyes grew wide. You too, she seemed to accurately appraise me. "Kamala Harris is Indian, too." She said it like she was sure I wouldn't have known that, like many grandmothers think anyone younger than thirty is a babe who can't read. She was so sweet, and I didn't have the heart to tell her when we blew past my stop. 

"I don't know why they just don't declare a National Emergency," she said. "Can't we just put the breaks on for a while?" 

Bus Grandma got me thinking. These times certainly do feel like an emergency. And I'm sure it feels like that regardless of one's voting record; jobs feel hard to come by. Life is hard to afford. Late stage capitalism leaves no survivors except for its makers, and if you're not sure whether you're a maker, well, you're not. Your taxpayer dollars are going to killing children abroad, through bombs and sweatshops and state-sanctioned violence against their parents, and it's waved away by people who think you couldn't possibly understand foreign relations or World War II. Misogyny is at an all-time weird. And at the end of the day, it's unusually hot for a New York November. 

All that to say, there are good, beautiful things happening in many communities across the United States. And they're happening quickly, and with fervent passion, because people seem to understand the state that we are in. The lights are on, the ambulances are out, and we're clearing the roads for them to barrel down. To my surprise, however, it seems that the government has turned some lights on, too. At least, at first glance. The most recent National Emergency was declared by President Joe Biden in February of 2024 in the name of protecting Palestinians. Curious, I dug a little closer. And then dug a little wider. What National Emergencies can and do accomplish seems to span a wide range of possibilities, from expanding Naval militancy to delivering foreign aid to sanctions, sanctions, sanctions. Enacted through Proclamations and Executive Orders, however, the way these emergencies are utilized bypasses the checks and balances system, instead giving power of discrepancy and nuance to (usually) the Secretary of the Treasury. 