The history of emergency powers in the region predates the United States itself. In 1775, the Continental Congress passed emergency acts in regards to the Revolutionary War. These emergency acts included handling the ongoing crisis with Britain by creating the Continental Army with George Washington as commander, printing money, and boycotting British goods as a form of protest against Britain. Since then, executive powers have bypassed Congress often in times of stress. Abraham Lincoln famously bypassed congress during the Civil War to suspend habeas corpus and proclaim the blockade of Confederate ports. The first Emergency Proclamation, however, was done by Woodrow Wilson in 1917 during World War I, when he proclaimed that there was insufficient maritime resources in the private sector to carry imports and exports from the United States. The result of the emergency proclamation was a complete centralization of water transportation, which was overseen by the government. Without this proclamation, U.S. maritime power and its Naval forces would not exist as they do today. As America rose as a global superpower, the effectiveness and global impact of national emergencies grew broader. Presidents chose to bypass Congress via Proclamation or Executive Order. The first national emergency created by Executive Order was done by Jimmy Carter on the heels in response to the Iran hostage crisis. The emergency is ongoing today, renewed by each successive president. 

Although both can declare national emergencies, Proclamations and Executive Orders are technically different. Historically, Proclamations have tended to be celebratory announcements and are more symbolic in nature. While Proclamations are still utilized to establish states of emergency, they typically deal with private individuals or entities, and usually lack the effect of law unless the President is given authority by the Constitution or a federal article. Executive Orders, on the other hand, are laws enacted by whim of the President. Executive Orders are subject to judicial review in a post Marbury v Madison world. Courts can strike down Executive Orders if they find the order unconstitutional, or if they find it unreasonable, meaning the enacting president lacked authority to issue it in the first place. The Supreme Court, however, has historically exercised extreme caution when reviewing Presidential orders. 

The 1976 National Emergencies Act further formalized the way Executive Orders were handled. The act ended all previously established national emergencies and formally allowed presidents to declare national emergencies and gain special powers during these times. It also required that the president tell Congress before declaring a national emergency and allowed Congress to terminate the emergency with a joint resolution. 